Git is a distributed version control system
It helps multiple people work on the same project or documents by tracking and managing changes to the files.

Why VCS?
Backup and restore
Collaboration
Branching and merging 
Tracking Changes

We can use git on cmd or git bash(uses linux commands)
Git was originally developed on Linux by Linus Torvalds to manage the Linux kernel project.
Git itself is a C program, and its commands are essentially arguments passed to that program.

to set username and mail-id
git config --global user.name "anyname"
git config --global user.email "anyemail"

to check username and email currently in use
git config --list 

git does not access to all files in local comp.
git initialisation - git init 

git add filename (to add it to git repository or staging area)
git add * (add everything in current folder to git repo or staging area) 

to commit (A git commit is a command in git that captures a snapshot of the project's currently 
staged changes, creating a permanent record in the repository's history.)
git commit -m "message"

The git status command is used to display the current state of the working directory and the 
staging area. It provides a snapshot of your repository's status without modifying any files or commits. 

git diff- Shows unstaged changes(use git add to move to staging area and the commit)

to check if commit is made - git log 

to check the current branch - git master 

Working Directory: This is where you create, edit, and delete your project files locally. Changes in this area are considered untracked by Git until you decide to manage them.
Staging Area: The git add command is used to move changes from the working directory to the staging area. This area acts as a temporary buffer where you prepare and group specific changes into a snapshot before permanently saving them.
Local Repository: The git commit command takes the staged changes and permanently saves them as a new, historical snapshot (commit) in your local repository. This is your personal copy of the project's history.
Reverting Changes: The git checkout command is used to move back through the history or switch branches, effectively restoring files from the repository to the working directory or staging area.

Shows the changes made to a specific file within a given commit- git show <commitid> <filename> 
get commit id from git log , enter file name at last 
Ex- git show 76d6b387ca696b07afd306e8784704e780a42045:index.html

To navigate between various branches, commits and files within git repo- git checkout
Ex - git checkout 76d6b387ca696b07afd306e8784704e780a42045:index.html
here the commit with that specific commit id and particularly index.html file is restored.

to get back to latest version- git checkout master -- filename/*

if we made any change by mistake and save it 
to undo changes, get the last successful change- git restore . or filename(. means all files)
if we added the changes using git add then - 
git restore --staged<filepath> #to unstage
git restore <file_path> #to discard changes in the working directory


Added changes to staging area(didnt commit) after this added more changes to file- git restore --worktree filename(index.html)

how about if we did commit also wrong files
git reset --soft HEAD^(uncommit and keep the changes)
git reset --hard HEAD^(uncommit and discard the changes)

Logging in Git:
git log (shows all commits their time, commit id's etc)
git log -p -anynumber (last anynumber of commits with diff)
git log --stat  (summary of changes)

git log --pretty=oneline (one line mei dikhayega har commit ki information)
git log --pretty=format:"%h -&an:ar%s" (h is hash number author name how much time ago(relative hours) what changed)
git log -S function_name (can be used to get the log of all commits that touched a specific function)

git log --grep="V2" (used to search commit message, v2 is example here)

git log --since="2024-01-01"
git log --until="2024-01-01"

git log --author="Paul" (Paul is example)

all the commits done until now were on local repo
Now we will se how to work on remote repo (remote repo refers to a version of your project that resides on a 
network server or hosted repo on the internet.)

1)create repo on github
2)two options available create a new repo on the command line or push an existing repo from the command line
(here we do 2nd option right now)

git remote (Lists the shortnames of your configured remotes.)
git remote -v (to see the remote repo link)

till now we have seen how to make changes on local repo and push it to remote now we vice versa 
Example - 
create a new file in github on that remote repo and add some content 
commit the changes from there.
Now on local write git pull(used to fetch and download content from a remote repository)

The git clone command is a core Git utility used to create a local copy, or "clone," of an existing Git repository
For example my team members or testers

to clone
1) copy the https link of that github repo
2) go to terminal
2) Now select a directory 
Ex - ls , mkdir Git(to create folder Git if not present or use any folder) , cd Git/ (entered the Git directory)
3) git clone https-link-of-repo
4) Now if u write ls in Git directory that repo will be present.

We only did cloning but still we can see/access the older versions of the code.
if any changes are made to file after cloning we can git pull to fetch all changes from remote repo to local repo.

Branching and merging 
to check current branch- git branch
to create new branch - git branch nameofbranch(Ex-design)
jis branch ke upar star h mtlb vo currently selected h 
to switch to another branch - git checkout branchnameuwanttogo(Ex-design)

now just do the changes and commit, and changes are made to the specific branch which is selected rn(Ex-Design) and not the main branch.

to merge:
1) first go to main branch(Ex- git checkout main)
2) now to merge - git merge branch-you-want-tomerge-in-main(Ex- design)
3) Now changes are made to main branch of local repo, we can do git push to reflect changes on remote repo.
yha par github new branch bani thi ye nhi fetch kar payega kyuki humne yha local repo mei nyi branch banayi aur use merge karke send kar 
diya remote repo to github ko laga ye changes main branch mei hi ho gye yaani use changes ka source samgh nhi aya.
Agar hum chahte h ki nyi branch bhi track ho github par tab hume directly us branch ko push karna hoga local se remote mei 
4)how to directly push the branch with changes to remote repo - git push origin name-of-the-branch(Ex-design)
ab ye branch bhi reflect hogi github par 
5)ab owner merge request accept kar lega github par  

git conflict:
maan lo main branch mei kisi ne line 3 change kiya aur design branch mei bhi kisi ne line 3 change kara apne hisaab se aur dono ne commit kar diya.
Ab yha merge conflict rise ho jayega.
Ab yha main owner decide karega kise merge karna h ya aapas mei mutually decide karlo.

Git forking and pull request 
Imagine ek person ko mere code mei improvements karne ki icha h, to vo mere project ya code ko fork kar sakta h aur vo changes hume shi lage to hum 
merge kar sakte h.
to apne end se github pe fork kar sakta h
aur changes kar sakta h(apne end par) aur fir commit pe click karke open pull request kar sakta h.
ab mei us pull request ko apne end se dekhunga ki mughe merge karna h ki nhi.
aur git pull karunga to local repo mei bhi vo changes aa jayenge.

agar humne koi repo fork kar rakhi aur uske baad usme koi changes aa jate h to uss repo par jaake(github) hum sync fork kar sakte h (and then click update branch)

Git ignore
create a .gitignore file in your project or repo and mention all files we dont want to commit like logs(unnecessary) or json file passwords or api's etc.
just write the file names 
Ex- app.log
    user.json
    *.log

Ab hum iss gitignore file ko commit kas sakte h and then git push


git clean - untracked files or changes(jo changes kare par commmit nhi)
- git clean -n → Dry run. Shows what would be removed without actually deleting anything.
- git clean -f → Removes untracked files

Git Tags 
Hume koi bhi commit dekhne ke liye uski id yaad rakhni padti , hum git tag se commits ko ek naam de sakte h 
Ex- git tag -a tag-name(Ex-V7) -m "This is V7(ya koi bhi message)"  (for commit we have worked recently)
git tag karoge to saare tags show karega
git log karoge to iss baar git tag bhi likha aayega baaki info ke saath
aur, git show commit-id/tag-name karke uss commit ko access bhi kar sakte 

purani commit ko tag-name dene ke liye - git tag -a tag-name(ex- V6) -m "koi bhi message"

ye tags abhi local , inhe remote karne ke liye: git push origin --tags
ye tags github par directly show hote h under tags sections

host a website using github
settings - pages - select branch - folder(root or other) - custom(not necessary) - click save - we get link