pwd - present working directory
whoami - current user logged 
date - for date, time
date +%D - for date only
date +%T - for time only
date +%H:%M - for time in hours and minutes format 
ls - display files and directories in current location 
ls -lt  - display files and directories in current location with more detailed information
ls -ltr - same output just the latest modified file is shown at bottomost <button
ls -lh - same but details about size of files(in kb)
clear - clear linux terminal


CREATING , DELETING AND EDITING FILES 
read a file - cat filename

read a file and search for a word
1. less filename
2. /writetheword   (here forward slash means top to bottom if you write ?writetheword then its bottom to top)
3. there can be many occurance for a word , write n to move to next occurance

view content of a file page by page - more filename
create our own file - touch filename 
delete a file - rm filename
create a new file and open edit mode as well - vi filename

While in edit mode some text like INSERT will be written at last which means we can write in the file.
when we done with editing press esc key and the text at bottom(INSERT) will disappear.
Press SHIFT + : to save at a : will appear at last then write wq to exit . Now we are out of editor.

nano is user-friendly way to edit a file - nano filename

create new folder or directory - mkdir foldername
delete a folder or directory - rmdir foldername

how to change path or move to another folder in linux- cd foldername/ 
opens the folder we enter name 
or if u want to go directly in the folder of folders(need to know exact name of folders and path) - cd foldername/foldername/foldername/

return to prev folder(ek folder peeche jana) - cd ..
return to prev to prev folder - cd ../..

in Linux main directory is called root directory (root directory is where all file system exist)
to access - cd /

copy a file - cp filenametobecopied filedirectory

i want change the location of a file from prev folder to this - cd ../filename .

copy the contents of a file to another file - cp filenamecopyfrom filepasteto

move a file to another folder - mv filename foldername/

change file name(no specific command) - mv filenameold filenamenew

how to read or display top 5 lines from a file in linux-  head -no.oflines(Ex-5) filename(Ex-test.csv)
how to read or display last 5 lines from a file in linux-  tail -5 test.csv

sort the content from a file in linux- sort filename(Ex-Demo.txt)
reverse sorting-  sort -r Demo.txt

display unique content from a file in linux-  sort filename | uniq 
| symbol is used to combine 2 commands.


A file has 9 lines , how to split this file in 3 different files in linux-   split -l 3 filename

how to search a word and display matching content from a file in linux-  grep "anyword" filename
*humne search kara tha par vo similar content mei idhar se udhar jump kar rha tha par ye wala command 
saare results ek saath display kar deta h*

how to search multiple words and display matching content from a file in linux-  egrep "word1|word2" filename

how to use wildcards in linux- 
files whose names starts with x-  ls x*

how to count no. of lines in a file in linux-  wc -l filename

how to check if two files are identical or not in linux-  cmp filename1 filename2

how to compare and display differences between 2 files of linux-   diff -u filename1 filename2

how to find file in linux- 
first go to home dir using cd 
then write-  find ./ -name(exact) filename

how to find a file in linux
to find file fast and direct- locate filename    (only works for updated files i.e if new files are added you
need to update the database first)
to update the database- updatedb or sudo updatedb


Utility commands
how to see previously used commands- history or just use use arrow keys to see prev used commands
to see filtered list of prev used commands- history | grep anysmallprevcommands(Ex- sort)

to get list of commands- ls --help (unstructured list)
to get structured list of commands- ls --help | more

to perform small calculations in linux- bc (press ctrl + c to exit the calculator)
to check calendar- cal or cal anyyear or cal anymonth anyyear 

to check how long server has been running in linux- uptime
how to start record your activity on terminal in a file?  script 
how to end record your activity on terminal in a file?  ctrl + D

how to create a shortcut of a long command in linux?   alias l="ls -ltr"
to view all shortcuts-  alias -p

how to compress a file in linux-  gzip -k filename 
how to decompress a file in linux-   gunzip filename
how to compress a folder in linux?  tar -czf  compressfoldername oldfoldername/ 
hoe to decompress a folder?  tar -xzf foldername

how to compress mutiple files into a single file?  zip zipfilenameyouwant filename1 filename2 
how to list files in zipped file?  unzip -l filename 

how to download a file from from internet?  wget URL_of_file
                                            wget -0 givenamefordownloadfile URL_of_file 

how to call an API?  curl apilink 
how to install an application on linux? apt or yum/dnf 
Ex- yum install nginx

check installed packages- dnf installed 
check a particular package- dnf installed | grep java 

how to start/stop service in linux? systemctl start ngnix.service
to check a service ? systemctl status servicename.service 
how to list all services- systemctl list-units --type=service --all 

how to list all existing environment variables on linux? print env 

print only 1st and 2nd coloumn from the csv table: awk -F , '{print $1,$2}' filename 
how to display starting two characters of all line? cut -c1-2 filename 
display a specific line from a file? sed -n '5p' filename
5th line will be printed 

replace a word from another word-  sed 's/business/finance/g' filename 
business will be replaced from finance (it is not a permanent change)

check the size of files-  ls -lh 
change the file size-  truncate -s sizeyouwant filename 

how to change user or login as different user in linux? su user_name 
first it will ask password for existing user 

how to exit as current user or close terminal in linux? exit 

if you are not root user, how to execute admin commands like installing new apps?  sudo yum install httpd

access remote servers- ssh user@hostname 

how to check permissions of a file? ls -ltr 
change ownership of a file-  chown newowner filename 
change grp ownership of a file- chgrp grpname filename 

check %memory and CPU and utilization- top 
get id no. of a process- pgrep processname 
how to stop process by id-  kill -9 process_id 
how to stop process by name-  pkill name 


how to create a new user on our linux server?  useradd name 
to check ?  id name 
you will see id and group
now set password for new user

how to create new group-  groupadd grpname 
change grp of a user- usermod -G grpname username 

