There are several relational database software packages. Some are free and open source, while others are paid 
and proprietary. Here some popular relational database distributions:
MySQL
Postgres
SQLite
Microsoft SQL Server
MariaDB
Oracle
IBM DB2

SQL is a standard language for storing, manipulating and retrieving data in databases.

What Can SQL do?
SQL can execute queries against a database
SQL can retrieve data from a database
SQL can insert records in a database
SQL can update records in a database
SQL can delete records from a database
SQL can create new databases
SQL can create new tables in a database
SQL can create stored procedures in a database
SQL can create views in a database
SQL can set permissions on tables, procedures, and views


To build a web site that shows data from a database, you will need:
An RDBMS database program (i.e. MS Access, SQL Server, MySQL)
To use a server-side scripting language, like PHP or ASP
To use SQL to get the data you want
To use HTML / CSS to style the page

The data in RDBMS is stored in database objects called tables. A table is a collection of related 
data entries and it consists of columns and rows. 

Every table is broken up into smaller entities called fields. The fields in the Customers table consist 
of CustomerID, CustomerName, ContactName, Address, City, PostalCode and Country. A field is a column in 
a table that is designed to maintain specific information about every record in the table.

A record, also called a row, is each individual entry that exists in a table. For example, there are 91 
records in the above Customers table. A record is a horizontal entity in a table.


Some of The Most Important SQL Commands
SELECT - extracts data from a database
UPDATE - updates data in a database
DELETE - deletes data from a database
INSERT INTO - inserts new data into a database
CREATE DATABASE - creates a new database
ALTER DATABASE - modifies a database
CREATE TABLE - creates a new table
ALTER TABLE - modifies a table
DROP TABLE - deletes a table
CREATE INDEX - creates an index (search key)
DROP INDEX - deletes an index